a paragraph is a series of sentences that are organized and coherent, and are all related to a single topic. 
almost every piece of writing you do that is longer than a few sentences should be organized into paragraphs. 
this is because paragraphs show a reader where the subdivisions of an essay begin and end, and thus help the reader see the organization of the essay and grasp its main points.
paragraphs can contain many different kinds of information. a paragraph could contain a series of brief examples or a single long illustration of a general point. 
it might describe a place, character, or process; narrate a series of events; compare or contrast two or more things; classify items into categories; or 
describe causes and effects. regardless of the kind of information they contain, all paragraphs share certain characteristics. one of the most important of these is a topic sentence.
topic sentences
a well-organized paragraph supports or develops a single controlling idea, which is expressed in a sentence called the topic sentence. 
a topic sentence has several important functions: it substantiates or supports an essay’s thesis statement; it unifies the content of a paragraph and directs 
the order of the sentences; and it advises the reader of the subject to be discussed and how the paragraph will discuss it. readers generally look to the first few sentences in a paragraph to determine the subject and perspective of the paragraph. 
that’s why it’s often best to put the topic sentence at the very beginning of the paragraph. in some cases, however, it’s more effective to place another sentence before the topic sentence—for example, a sentence linking the current 
paragraph to the previous one, or one providing background information.
although most paragraphs should have a topic sentence, there are a few situations when a paragraph might not need a topic sentence. 
for example, you might be able to omit a topic sentence in a paragraph that narrates a series of events, if a paragraph continues developing an idea that you 
introduced (with a topic sentence) in the previous paragraph, or if all the sentences and details in a paragraph clearly refer—perhaps indirectly—to a main point. the vast majority of your paragraphs, 
however, should have a topic sentence.

most paragraphs in an essay have a three-part structure—introduction, body, and conclusion. you can see this structure in paragraphs whether they are narrating, 

describing, comparing, contrasting, or analyzing information. each part of the paragraph plays an important role in communicating your meaning to your reader.


introduction: the first section of a paragraph; should include the topic sentence and any other sentences at the beginning of the paragraph that give background information or provide a transition.
body: follows the introduction; discusses the controlling idea, using facts, arguments, analysis, examples, and other information.


conclusion: the final section; summarizes the connections between the information discussed in the body of the paragraph and the paragraph’s controlling idea.
the following paragraph illustrates this pattern of organization. in this paragraph the topic sentence and concluding sentence (capitalized) both help the 

reader keep the paragraph’s main point in mind.
